Python 314 is now officially released
and I'd like to share some of my
favorite new features. I'm not going to
talk about the experimental
freethreading mode, uh the just in time
compiler or other performance
improvements. I'm going to focus on
features that you can use right after
you upgrade. One of the most immediately
visible features in Python 314 is all
the color. The Python ripple now
includes syntax highlighting. When you
type code into the Python ripple, it
will be colorized as you type it. The
Python debugger also gains syntax
highlighting in 314. So when you're
debugging code, whether with a
breakpoint call or some other way of
entering PDB, your source code will now
be colorized. Also, if you've ever
wished that Python's unit test module
included nicely colored output like
Piest, it does now. Now with unit test,
failing tests are red and passing tests
are green. And that's not all the color.
The ARG parse module now also supports
colorized help text. Also, the JSON
module's command line interface now
displays JSON output in color by
default. Speaking of the JSON modules
command line interface, you can now run
it with Python-mjson
instead of Python-mjson.tool.
I actually made this tiny change and
it's the first code contribution I've
made to Python. It is a very small one,
but kind of a neat one. Python 314
includes even more improvements to error
messages, particularly syntax errors. In
previous versions of Python, you'd often
get a generic syntax error if you
misspelled a Python keyword like import.
But in Python 314, the error message now
suggests the correct keyword instead.
Python's error messages have improved a
lot in the past few versions, and this
is exactly the kind of change that makes
Python even more beginner friendly.
Another ripple improvement that I
stumbled upon recently while teaching is
tab completion of Python imports. When
you're in the ripple and you type the
import statement followed by the start
of a module name and then you hit tab,
it autocompletes the module name. This
is especially handy for long module
names like collections or datetime.
Python 314 also includes a bunch of
little improvements to various standard
library modules. For example, the arg
parse module now includes a suggest on
error argument that will suggest
corrections when you make a typo in the
choices options for a command line
argument. Here we're misspelling
scissors and Python showing us the
option that it thinks we meant to type
spelled correctly. One of my favorite
features in Python 314 is that
pathlib.path objects now have copy and
move methods. Before 314, if we wanted
to copy or move a file, we had to use
Python's shuttil module. But in 314, you
can just use the move method directly on
the path object. There's also a move
into method for moving a file into a
directory, as well as a copy method and
a copy into method. The path class also
gained a new info attribute that caches
information about whether a path
represents an existing file or
directory. In 314, you can also now
parse a date string or a time string
directly into a datetime. Object or a
datetime object. In previous versions of
Python, you either needed to use
datetime.datetime.sturp
time and then extract the date or parse
the string manually. But in 314, you can
just use date. Time directly. The date
and time classes now have their own stir
time method that works the same way as
the datetime classes stir time method.
Python's UUID module now includes UUID
6, 7, and 8 functions. If you're
starting a new project and you need to
generate UU IDs, I'd recommend taking a
look at UUID 7. It has all the pseudo
randomness benefits of UU ID 4, but the
generated UU IDs are also ordered by
their creation time. The sortability of
these UYU IDs can be really useful for
things like database primary keys. Have
you ever written code that catches
multiple exception types? In previous
Python versions, you needed to wrap
those exception types in parenthesis. In
314, you can omit the parenthesis and
the code still works. This earlier
version was a holdover back from the
Python 2 days. 314 also includes some
interesting improvements for concurrent
and parallel programming. Concurrent.
Futures now includes an interpreter pool
executor which spawns a new Python
interpreter in a separate thread but in
the same process. And each interpreter
has its own global interpreter lock
meaning they can each use separate CPUs
if needed. So you kind of get the best
of both worlds between multi-threading
and multipprocessing. Also, if you've
ever needed to inspect running async
tasks, well, you can now do so from the
command line. Also, 314 now has an
external debugger interface that allows
you to safely attach debuggers to
running Python processes, so you can
start a breakpoint from a process that's
already running. The last thing I'd like
to talk about in 314 is a new syntax,
T-strings. The T in TR stands for
template. And unlike fstrings, they
don't actually make strings, they make
template objects. These template objects
allow a utility to pre-process the
interpolations within the template in
whatever way they'd like before actually
making a string. Keep in mind that
fstrings are still the go-to string
formatting tool. T-strings are really
useful for library authors in
particular. So, you might find yourself
soon using a library in Python where a
T-string is required and not an F string
because some pre-processing needs to be
done in some of your data. I'm planning
to release another video all about
t-strings soon. If you're excited about
syntax highlighting, the new pathlid
methods, or anything else that I
mentioned, go install Python 314 and try
it out. And if you want to see
everything that's new, go to the what's
new in Python 314 page in the
documentation.
[Music]